#####################
pre-commit-docx-plain
#####################

**Pre-commit hook for mirroring Word (docx) files into plain text files (using Pandoc).**

This pre-commit hook provides a solution for organizations that manage Word (.docx) documents with Git and GitHub.
With this hook, whenever a Word document is committed or updated in a Git repository, a plain text version is also created.
You can use this plain-text mirror to facilitate GitHub Pull Request reviews.

Set up
======

At the root of your document's Git repository, add a file named ``.pre-commit-config.yaml`` with the following contents::

   repos:
     - repo: https://github.com/jsickcodes/pre-commit-docx-plain
       rev: 0.3.0
       hooks:
         - id: docxplain

Next, you'll need to install pre-commit (if you haven't already)::

   pip install -U pre-commit

Initialize the pre-commit hooks in the repository itself::

   pre-commit install

If the repository has an existing Word document, it is a good idea to create the mirrored plain text file now::

   pre-commit run --all-files

Commit the plain text (``.txt``) file that is generated.

Local usage
===========

If you are contributing to a repository using ``pre-commit-docx-plain``, you will also need to install pre-commit itself and install the pre-commit hooks in your local clone of the repository::

   pre-commit install -U pre-commit
   pre-commit install

Now, when you update and commit changes to the Word file in your repository, pre-commit will run the ``pre-commit-docx-plain`` hook and generate a new or updated mirror of the file in plain text.
Use ``git add`` to stage the plain text file and try your ``git commit`` again.
On this second try, the plain text mirror file should be in sync with the Word file, and the commit can go ahead.

Usage with GitHub Actions
=========================

You can run ``pre-commit-docx-plain`` in GitHub Actions to ensure that the plain-text mirror file is always up-to-date.
If the repository does not already have a GitHub Actions workflow, create a file with the path ``.github/workflows/ci.yaml`` with the following contents::

   name: CI

   "on": [push, pull_request]

   jobs:
     pre-commit:
       runs-on: ubuntu-latest

       steps:
         - uses: actions/checkout@v2

         - name: Set up Python
           uses: actions/setup-python@v2

         - name: Install pandoc
           run: brew install pandoc

         - name: Run pre-commit hooks
           uses: pre-commit/action@v2.0.0

This workflow will generate a build "failure" if the plain-text mirror file is out of date with the Word file in the repository — as might happen if a contributor did not install pre-commit locally.

Automatically generate the plain text mirror from GitHub Actions
================================================================

To avoid complexities related to installing pre-commit, the GitHub Actions workflow can be configured to automatically generate, commit, and push updates to the plain text mirror.
The ``.github/workflows/ci.yaml`` file::

   name: CI

   "on": [push, pull_request]

   jobs:
     pre-commit:
       runs-on: ubuntu-latest

       steps:
         - uses: actions/checkout@v2
           with:
             fetch-depth: 0

         - name: Set up Python
           uses: actions/setup-python@v2

         - name: Install pandoc
           run: brew install pandoc

         - name: Run pre-commit hooks
           uses: pre-commit/action@v2.0.0
           with:
             token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}

Note that this workflow can only run with private repositories.
The ``GITHUB_TOKEN`` secret is not available to public forks.

When using this workflow, contributors need to either pull down the plain text file update to their local branch, or be prepared to use a forced push (``git push --force``) because their branch is "behind" the GitHub origin.

Configuration
=============

This pre-commit hook works out of the box, but does allow for some customization.

Plain text filename suffix
--------------------------

By default, if the Word file is named ``document.docx``, the plain text mirror file is named ``document.txt``.
However, you can customize the suffix of the file name by setting a ``--suffix`` command-line option::

   repos:
     - repo: https://github.com/jsickcodes/pre-commit-docx-plain
       rev: 0.3.0
       hooks:
         - id: docxplain
           args:
             - "--suffix"
             - ".extracted.txt"

Plain text file header
----------------------

You can add a header to the plain text file's content by setting the ``--header`` command-line option
This is useful for explaining that the file is autogenerated::

   repos:
     - repo: https://github.com/jsickcodes/pre-commit-docx-plain
       rev: 0.3.0
       hooks:
         - id: docxplain
           args:
             - "--header"
             - "THIS FILE IS AUTOGENERATED"

You can also insert the name of the source docx file using Python format string syntax and the ``docx`` template variable::

   repos:
     - repo: https://github.com/jsickcodes/pre-commit-docx-plain
       rev: 0.3.0
       hooks:
         - id: docxplain
           args:
             - "--header"
             - "This file is autogenerated from {docx}. Do not edit."
